This is a separate to-do list for Paul Anderson, to keep Silvere (and others)
informed about the areas I will be working...

My main goal at present is to document, organize and verify the existing
mathematics packages. The other todo.txt list has some good suggestions for
additional functionality.

First step is to update the existing documentation, that is, find out what is
a) missing, b) outdated, and c) incomplete. I'll make a list of what I find and
add it here.

Second, I'd like to get the existing test packages working. Again, I'll make a
list of what's working and what's not, and another list for what's missing.

Third, as a result of steps one and two I should have a clear picture of what
is in the mathematics packages. I'd like to create an overview document to
make it easier for others to learn what is there. This should also help to
identify gaps and overlaps in the packages. Then we can use that to give
priority to changes and additions.

PDA 11 Feb 2006

Okay -- first look at current documentation:

org.jscience.mathematics: Package description consists of a (good) list of
Java math projects with hyperlinks. Need an overview, summarizing contents
and stating goals and design decisions.

org.jscience.mathematics.algebraic: Package description refers reader to
Wikipedia. Need (as above) overview, summary and goals.

org.jscience.mathematics.analysis. Package description is single line. Need
overview, summary, goals.

org.jscience.mathematics.axiomatic: Package description is single line. Classes
within the package are essentially undocumented. Two text files containing
rules(?) and definitions are included.

org.jscience.mathematics.geometry: Package is well-documented. Unfortunately,
documentation is in Japanese. I will attempt to add some English descriptions
where intent is obvious.

org.jscience.mathematics.statistics: Package is well documented other than
top-level package description.

org.jscience.mathematics.wavelets: Package description is missing. Lots of code
here. I don't know anything about wavelets, so I will not attempt to document
this package and subpackages at present.

PDA 11 Feb 2006

